[windows] run windows agent as non-privileged user (#3117)
DataDog/datadog-agent: docs/agent/secrets.md

by the agent. This feature allows users to no longer store passwords and other
secrets in plain text in configuration files. Users have the flexibility to
design their executable according to their preferred key management service,
authentication method, and continuous integration workflow.

For now, secrets are not supported in APM or Process configurations.

For now, secrets are not supported in APM or Live Process configurations.

This section covers how to set up this feature.

- [[BETA] Secrets Management](#beta-secrets-management)
  - [Defining secrets in configurations](#defining-secrets-in-configurations)
  - [Retrieving secrets from the secret backend](#retrieving-secrets-from-the-secret-backend)
    - [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [Agent security requirements](#agent-security-requirements)
      - [Linux](#linux)
      - [Windows](#windows)
    - [Agent security requirements](#agent-security-requirements-1)
      - [Linux](#linux-1)
    - [The executable API](#the-executable-api)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
      - [Seeing configurations after secrets were injected](#seeing-configurations-after-secrets-were-injected)

>       - [Debugging your secret_backend_command](#debugging-your-secretbackendcommand)

Reviewer: this anchor doesn't work

Author: @hush-hush same here

**This feature is in beta and its options or behavior might break between
minor or bugfix releases of the Agent.**

> Starting with version `6.3.0` on Linux and `6.11` on Windows, the agent is able

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with version `6.3.0` on Linux and `6.11` on Windows, the Agent is able
```

to leverage the `secrets` package in order to call a user-provided executable
to handle retrieval or decryption of secrets, which are then loaded in memory

> by the agent. This feature allows users to no longer store passwords and other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by the Agent. This feature allows users to no longer store passwords and other
```

This section covers how to set up this feature.

- [[BETA] Secrets Management](#beta-secrets-management)
  - [Defining secrets in configurations](#defining-secrets-in-configurations)
  - [Retrieving secrets from the secret backend](#retrieving-secrets-from-the-secret-backend)
    - [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [Agent security requirements](#agent-security-requirements)
      - [Linux](#linux)
      - [Windows](#windows)
    - [The executable API](#the-executable-api)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
    - [Listing detected secrets](#listing-detected-secrets)
    - [Seeing configurations after secrets were injected](#seeing-configurations-after-secrets-were-injected)
    - [Debugging your secret_backend_command](#debugging-your-secretbackendcommand)
      - [Linux](#linux-1)
      - [Windows](#windows-1)
        - [Rights related errors](#rights-related-errors)
        - [Testing your executable](#testing-your-executable)
    - [Agent refusing to start](#agent-refusing-to-start)

## Defining secrets in configurations

To declare a secret in a check configuration simply use the `ENC[]` notation.

> This notation can be used to denotate a secret as the *value* of any YAML field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This notation can be used to denote a secret as the *value* of any YAML field
```

    user: "ENC[db_prod_user]"
    password: "ENC[db_prod_password]"

    # The `ENC[]` handle must be the entire YAML value, which means that

>     # the following will NOT be detected as a secret handle:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # the following is NOT detected as a secret handle:
```

To retrieve secrets, you have to provide an executable that is able to
authenticate to and fetch secrets from your secrets management backend.

The Agent caches secrets internally in memory to reduce the number of calls
(useful in a containerized environment for example). The Agent calls the
executable every time it accesses a check configuration file that contains at
least one secret handle for which the secret is not already loaded in memory. In
particular, secrets that have already been loaded in memory do not trigger
additional calls to the executable. In practice, this means that the Agent calls
the user-provided executable once per file that contains a secret handle at
startup, and might make additional calls to the executable later if the Agent or
instance is restarted, or if the Agent dynamically loads a new check containing
a secret handle (e.g. via Autodiscovery).

By design, the user-provided executable needs to implement any error handling

> mechanism that a user might require. Conversely, the Agent will need to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mechanism that a user might require. Conversely, the Agent needs to be
```

restarted if a secret has to be refreshed in memory (e.g. revoked password).

This approach which relies on a user-provided executable has multiple benefits:

> - Guarantees that the Agent will not attempt to load in memory parameters for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Guarantees that the Agent does not attempt to load in memory parameters for
```

### Agent security requirements

The Agent runs `secret_backend_command` executable as a sub-process. The
execution patterns differ on Linux and Windows.

#### Linux

On Linux, the executable set as `secret_backend_command` **MUST** (the Agent

> will refuse to use it otherwise):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
refuses to use it otherwise):
```

- Belong to the same user running the Agent (by default `dd-agent` or `root`
  inside a container).
- Have **no** rights for `group` or `other`.
- Have at least `exec` right for the owner.

Also:
- The executable shares the same environment variables as the Agent.
- Never output sensitive information on STDERR. If the binary exits with a
  different status code than `0` the Agent logs the standard error output
  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

#### Windows

On Windows, the executable set as `secret_backend_command` **MUST** (the Agent
will refuse to use it otherwise):

- Have `Read/Exec` for `ddagentuser` (the user used to run the Agent).
- Have **no** rights for any user or group except `Administrator` or `LocalSystem`.
- Be a valid Win32 application so the Agent can execute it.

Also:
- The executable shares the same environment variables as the Agent.
- Never output sensitive information on STDERR. If the binary exit with a

>   different status code than `0` the Agent will log the standard error output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  different status code than `0` the Agent logs the standard error output
```

  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

Here is an example of a [powershell script](secrets_scripts/set_rights.ps1)
that removes rights on a file to everybody except from `Administrator` and
`LocalSystem` and then add `ddagentuser`. Use it only as an example as your
setup might differ.

> The Agent GUI will **NOT** show the decrypted password but the raw handle. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Agent GUI does **NOT** show the decrypted password but instead shows the raw handle. This
```

### Agent security requirements

> The agent will run `secret_backend_command` executable as a sub-process. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The agent runs `secret_backend_command` executable as a sub-process. The
```

> execution pattern differ on Linux and Windows.

Reviewer 2: Should either `patterns differ` or `pattern differs`

  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

#### Windows

On Windows, the executable set as `secret_backend_command` **MUST** (the agent
will refuse to use it otherwise):

- Have `Read/Exec` for `ddagentuser` (the user used to run the agent).
- Have **no** rights for any user or group except `Administrator` or `LocalSystem`.
- Be a valid Win32 application so the agent can execute it.

Also:
- The executable will share any the same environment variables than agent.
- Never output sensitive information on STDERR. If the binary exit with a
  different status code than `0` the agent will log the standard error output
  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

Here is an example of a [powershell script](secrets_scripts/set_rights.ps1)
that remove rights on a file to everybody except from `Administrator` and
`LocalSystem` and then add `ddagentuser`. Use it only as an example as your
setup might differ.

The agent GUI will **NOT** show the decrypted password but the raw handle. This
is on purposes as it let you edit configuration files. To see the final config
after being decrypted use the `configcheck` command on the datadog-agent CLI.

> ### Agent security requirements

Reviewer: this section is duplicated on Linux

Author: @hush-hush same here

- Have at least `exec` right for the owner.

Also:

> - The executable will share the same environment variables than agent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The executable shares the same environment variables as the Agent.
```

- Never output sensitive information on STDERR. If the binary exit with a

>   different status code than `0` the agent will log the standard error output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  different status code than `0` the Agent logs the standard error output
```

  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

#### Windows

> On Windows, the executable set as `secret_backend_command` **MUST** (the agent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Windows, the executable set as `secret_backend_command` **MUST** (the Agent
```

> will refuse to use it otherwise):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
refuses to use it otherwise):
```

Author: I think `will refuse` is correct in this case.

> - Have `Read/Exec` for `ddagentuser` (the user used to run the agent).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have `Read/Exec` for `ddagentuser` (the user used to run the Agent).
```

- Have **no** rights for any user or group except `Administrator` or `LocalSystem`.

> - Be a valid Win32 application so the agent can execute it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Be a valid Win32 application so the Agent can execute it.
```

Also:

> - The executable will share any the same environment variables than agent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The executable shares the same environment variables as the Agent.
```

- Never output sensitive information on STDERR. If the binary exit with a
  different status code than `0` the agent will log the standard error output
  of the executable to ease troubleshooting.

Here is an example of a [powershell script](secrets_scripts/set_rights.ps1)

> that remove rights on a file to everybody except from `Administrator` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that removes rights on a file to everybody except from `Administrator` and
```

`LocalSystem` and then add `ddagentuser`. Use it only as an example as your
setup might differ.

> The agent GUI will **NOT** show the decrypted password but the raw handle. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Agent GUI does **NOT** show the decrypted password, instead it shows the raw handle. This
```

## Troubleshooting

### Listing detected secrets

The `secret` command in the Agent CLI shows any errors related to your setup
(if the rights on the executable aren't the right one for example). It 
also lists all handles found and where they where found.

> On Linux the command will output file mode, owner and group for the executable,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Linux the command outputs file mode, owner and group for the executable,
```

## Troubleshooting

> ### Listing dectected secrets

Reviewer: typo `detected` (TOC entry will have to be updated as well)

   is never saved anywhere). In Powershell run:
   ```powershell
   $user = [ADSI]"WinNT://./ddagentuser";
   $user.SetPassword("a_new_password")
   ```
3. Update the password to be used by `DatadogAgent` service in the Service
   Control Manager. In powershell run:
   ```powershell
   sc.exe config DatadogAgent password= "a_new_password"
   ```

You can now login as `ddagentuser` to test your executable. We have a
[powershell script](secrets_scripts/secrets_tester.ps1) to help you test your
executable as another user. It will switch the user context and mimic how the
agent runs your executable.

Example on how to use it:
```powershell
.\secrets_tester.ps1 -user ddagentuser -password a_new_password -executable C:\path\to\your\executable.exe -payload '{"version": "1.0", "secrets": ["secret_ID_1", "secret_ID_2"]}'
Creating new Process with C:\path\to\your\executable.exe
Waiting a second for the process to be up and running
Writing the payload to Stdin
Waiting a second so the process can fetch the secrets
stdout:
{"secret_ID_1":{"value":"secret1"},"secret_ID_2":{"value":"secret2"}}
stderr: None
exit code:
0
```

> #### Agent refusing to start

Reviewer: this section is duplicated (and the dupe above isn't in the right place)

Author: @hush-hush Can you have a look at this?  I suspect it was a botched merge...

===
```

> Note that the Agent needs to be restarted to pick up changes on configuration files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: The Agent needs to be restarted to pick up changes on configuration files.
```

### Debugging your secret_backend_command

> To test or debug outside of the Agent you can simply mimic how the Agent will run it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test or debug outside of the Agent you can mimic how the Agent runs it:
```

The `dd-agent` user is created when you install the datadog-agent.

#### Windows

##### Rights related errors

If you encounter one of the following errors then something is missing in your

> setup. See Windows intructions [here](#windows).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
setup. See the [Windows instructions](#windows).
```

> 1. If any other group or user than needed has rights on the executable you will get a similar error in the log:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If any other group or user than needed has rights on the executable a similar error displays in the log:
```

   ```
   error while decrypting secrets in an instance: Invalid executable 'C:\decrypt.exe': other users/groups than LOCAL_SYSTEM, Administrators or ddagentuser have rights on it
   ```

> 2. If `ddagentuser` doesn't have read and execute right on the file, you will get a similar error:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If `ddagentuser` doesn't have read and execute right on the file, a similar error displays:
```

   ```
   error while decrypting secrets in an instance: could not query ACLs for C:\decrypt.exe
   ```

> 3. Your executable needs to be a valid Win32 application, or you will get the following error:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Your executable needs to be a valid Win32 application, or the following error displays:
```

   ```
   error while running 'C:\decrypt.py': fork/exec C:\decrypt.py: %1 is not a valid Win32 application.
   ```

##### Testing your executable

Your executable is executed by the Agent when fetching your secrets. The
Datadog Agent runs using the `ddagentuser`. This user has no specific
rights but is part of the `Performance Monitor Users` group. The password for

> this user is randomly generated at install time and os never saved anywhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this user is randomly generated at install time and is never saved anywhere.
```

This means that your executable might work with your default user or
development user but not when it's run by the Agent, as `ddagentuser` has more
restricted rights.

The easiest way to test your executable in the same conditions as the Agent is

> to update the password of the `ddagentuser` on your dev box. This way you will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to update the password of the `ddagentuser` on your dev box. This way you can
```

> be able to authenticate as `ddagentuser` and run your executable in the same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
authenticate as `ddagentuser` and run your executable in the same
```

context the Agent would.

To do so, follow those steps:
1. Remove `ddagentuser` from the `Local Policies/User Rights Assignement/Deny
   Log on locally` list in the `Local Security Policy`.
2. Set a new password for ddagentuser (since the one generated at install time
   is never saved anywhere). In Powershell run:
   ```powershell
   $user = [ADSI]"WinNT://./ddagentuser";
   $user.SetPassword("a_new_password")
   ```
3. Update the password to be used by `DatadogAgent` service in the Service
   Control Manager. In powershell run:
   ```powershell
   sc.exe config DatadogAgent password= "a_new_password"
   ```

You can now login as `ddagentuser` to test your executable. We have a
[powershell script](secrets_scripts/secrets_tester.ps1) to help you test your

> executable as another user. It will switch the user context and mimic how the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executable as another user. It switches the user context and mimics how the
```

> agent runs your executable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Agent runs your executable.
```

Example on how to use it:
```powershell
.\secrets_tester.ps1 -user ddagentuser -password a_new_password -executable C:\path\to\your\executable.exe -payload '{"version": "1.0", "secrets": ["secret_ID_1", "secret_ID_2"]}'
Creating new Process with C:\path\to\your\executable.exe
Waiting a second for the process to be up and running
Writing the payload to Stdin
Waiting a second so the process can fetch the secrets
stdout:
{"secret_ID_1":{"value":"secret1"},"secret_ID_2":{"value":"secret2"}}
stderr: None
exit code:
0
```

### Agent refusing to start

The first thing the Agent does on startup is to load `datadog.yaml` and decrypt
any secrets in it. This is done before setting up the logging. This means that

> on platforms like Windows, errors occuring when loading `datadog.yaml` aren't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on platforms like Windows, errors occurring when loading `datadog.yaml` aren't
```

> written in the logs but on stderr (this can occurs when the executable given to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
written in the logs but on stderr (this can occur when the executable given to
```
